It wouldn't be a Brain Holt course I
didn't put XKCD somewhere in this,
my favorite comic.
Estimating timings,
estimating when stuff is gonna get done,
it's all hard, we're all bad at it.
And like this cartoon really resonates
with me it was basically like, okay,
I am trying to do some estimation here.
Here's the special, everyone says, like,
think about how much time it's gonna
take and then double it, right?
And this is just making fun of that.
I was like, yeah, and
then you end up wasting a ton of time
trying to think about it, right?
Anyway, I thought it was pretty funny.
Everyone gets it wrong.
So don't feel bad about that, rather
than try and guess the magic secret,
because humans are really bad at
estimating time just in general, and
particularly when it
comes to packets of work.
And particularly when it comes
to multiple people doing things.
And particularly when it comes to, you're
gonna have stuff that's gonna come up in
the middle, and new priorities, and
new fires, and stuff like that.
So, you can never predict it.
So just build a certain amount
of unpredictability into it.
Assume that all of your timelines
are always going to change.
And then just have good process
around communicating delays.
There was a reason that I chose a delay
for the project that we talked about for
most of these courses.
Because a lot of times our technical
communication is around timelines, right,
because those are the things that
slide around the most, right.
My product specs generally do not
change like the problem statements.
The goals and non goals do not change.
The metrics do not change.
The timelines change wildly,
throughout the process of a project.
So, all of that said how do you plan for
something so uncertain?
How do you make it like a not
a nonsensical event, right?
That's what I'm gonna try and
help you come to today.
So, I'm very biased around planning for
quarters.
All of my jobs have been around quarters,
Netflix did it, LinkedIn,
Microsoft, Stripe,
Snowflake basically it was just Reddit.
Reddit didn't really care about quarters
but Reddit didn't really care about much
of anything so
it's probably unsurprising to most of you.
I'm gonna talk about things
centered around quarters.
You might, there are some
companies that plan in half years,
there's some companies
that plan by the year,
there's some companies that
really only go month to month.
And there's some startups that are really
only worried about a sprint at
a time, right?
So, I'm happy for
you to kind of adjust this.
I'm just expressing to you my bias that
quarters is generally how
I think about everything.
So yeah, that snowflake were very based
around the fiscal quarter, which for us,
fiscal year starts in February, right?
So everything's off by month.
My brain melts around that but it's fine.
First of all, yeah, well,
we'll talk about the spin first.
Fit into your organization.
Don't try and
reinvent the wheel every single time,
it's better to be aligned than for
you to have the perfect process.
So if you go into an organization and
they're planned by fiscal quarters and
so February is a really hard month for
you then just do it, right?
Unless you have some great
efficiency gain to do there,
I'm not into idealistically
changing things for like that.
But that just means go around ask people,
how should we plan?
How should we get it done?
Some organizations,
Google famously, when you plan for
a quarter you plan for
more work than you can get done.
And I'm gonna say most organizations
work on this sort of system where,
hey, we're gonna plan ten tasks and
we only really intend to finish eight.
And at Google, they say if you
get all of your tasks done,
you didn't plan it enough.
I like that planning because it means
that, well, if I get all eight of them
done and I got another sprint left,
I'll do the ninth one, right?
And I already have a prioritized
list of things to get done.
There are other organizations that
like to say, if it's on your plan,
your roadmap for that quarter,
you are guaranteed to the rest of
organization unless something changes,
I'm gonna get all of this done.
The advantage to that is that now when
I look at everyone else's roadmap,
I can say I can pretty well guarantee,
most of this is gonna get,
all of this is gonna get done.
It gives you some dependability when you
look around the organization that these
people are being fairly conservative
with their planning motion, right?
So, I guess that's like how
conservative are you in your planning?
So, I prefer the more aggressive,
let's try and, put 70% on there or
100% on there and
we'll only get 70% done, or
put 100% on there and aim to get
100% done, that's kind of up to you.
When I have it the way that
it's more conservative,
generally what I will do is I
will make like a larger plan and
then I will only put on my
roadmap the committed part.
But I still have a larger roadmap behind
it, because that's how I think, right?
I think in a much more
longer term than that.
What if your org doesn't plan?
You should start planning.
I know a lot of start ups say, hey, we're
just super agile and we're just ready for,
we're doing daily sprints, and things
like that, it's bull, don't do that.
Every organization that has any sort of
alignment to drive should have some sort
of plan.
They should have a little bit of
a roadmap, they should have some idea and
alignment where everyone says,
like, here's a group of tasks
that we hope to accomplish in X amount
of time and we're gonna go at it.
And everyone's like, yep,
we're gonna do those things.
There's a lot of alignment and
power and a company coming together and
saying, this is our collective
plan to get work done.
It drives alignment from the perspective
of, if your customer service reps know
that, then they can start telling people
it's like, hey, we know this is broken,
it's on the roadmap and
we're gonna fix it.
Your sales team knows when to
start selling something and
when to start to deemphasize something.
Your marketing team can
get ahead of the curve and
start marketing things like before your
launches and get people on your apps.
And your engineering team knows that like,
hey, we got two things here that
we have to do, this one's higher on the
roadmap, we're gonna do this one first.
Shared prioritization of those things
is critical to drive alignment across
an organization.
So, if you are a two person startup,
you should plan.
If you're a one person startup, you should
plan, that's non negotiable in my book.
Like if I met a startup founder is like,
hey, we don't plan here.
I'd be like, hey,
I don't work here, right?
Like I'm not gonna deal with that.
Okay, that was another Brian Holt rant for
you.
Yeah, and this is actually
probably a big one here is like,
without some sort of plan, you tend to
suffer very strongly from recency bias.
That like something that just happened to
you, tends to be the most important to you
or something that you just learned about
tends to become really important to you,
really quickly.
I'm trynna think of an example of this,
like, I don't know, maybe you went into
a customer meeting with someone that
you viewed as an important customer.
Like, hey, we want this feature and you're
gonna come out of that meeting and for
like a week, that's gonna be really
important to you because you just heard it
from somebody even if it wasn't
the most important thing, right?
So this kind of inoculates you against
that kind of recency bias as like, hey,
about a month ago, we sat down and
we looked at all of this stuff, and
this range like ninth or
wasn't on our plan.
You can adjust the plan, it might be
really important, but that requires you to
be intentional, and being intentional
is what this is all about.
>> Or in the case of a small company, CEO
driven development tends to happen a lot.
>> You don't know anything about that.
[LAUGH]
>> You have a great idea,
and so now it's like,
we're at the stage we're at, it's like,
I have to file it away as an idea and
I have a list of tons of ideas.
So, when it's time to plan there's lots
of documentation to go off of versus
in the early stages like, well,
I think this is the most important thing,
but that changes frequently
versus the more long term.
>> Totally, and I love that because
then it forces the CEO to go
through the same process
as everyone else is like.
And it could be the best idea, and like
it is the CEO's call to say like, hey,
I actually do think this is really
important, but it forces the CEO to be
really intentional about what bets
they're making rather than being like,
I woke up today and I chose violence, so
I'm gonna go burn down the roadmap, right?
So.